Daniel Jackoway

Mrs. Basquill

American Literature 5

6 March 2009

Wilde's Mocking of the English Aristocracy as a Satirization of the English Treatment of Ireland

Oscar Wilde, a self-professed socialist who wrote _The Soul of Man Under Socialism_, wrote socialist themes for reasons more important to him than advancing the cause. Though Wilde supported socialism, an economic system employing liberal government control to support equality between the classes (Brians), he had no personal stake in it as he grew up on the "most fashionable side" of Merrion Square in Dublin, Ireland (Coakley 34). Though he was born wealthy, he was also born in Ireland at a time when the English not only controlled Ireland but thought of the Irish as the English aristocrats thought of the working class (Killeen 133). Thus, he found the cause of Irish nationalism important not only ideologically but personally. This struggle mirrored the socialist struggle of the working class to try to obtain independence from and equality to the nobles who at the time resided above them socially and economically. Wilde noticed this parallel and exploited it to advance both causes at once in _The Importance of Being Earnest_. 

Throughout _The Importance of Being Earnest_, Wilde mocks the English upper class by demonstrating their hypocritical attempts to appear to live up to Victorian ideals when, in reality, they violated them frequently and egregiously. The play features two main heroes, foils for each other; Algernon, who resides in London, sojourns in the country under the pretense of visiting his friend Bunbury when he wishes to avoid engagements, and his friend Jack, a country-dweller, claims to visit his brother Ernest in London when he wishes to escape his need to "adopt a high moral tone on all subjects" (6). These lies eventually raise many issues for the "Bunburyists", including ending both of their engagements. These lies and the many other instances of lack of respect for Victorian morals such as earnestness and respect for others criticizes the aristocratic characters of the play and thus the aristocracy altogether, leading to themes supporting socialist ideals of equality between the classes. Socialism, though something that Wilde supported, further acted to represent a cause with which Wilde related personally&mdash;Irish nationalism. Although Oscar Wilde came from the upper class and spent considerable time in London, he shows his Irish nationalism and his disdain for the English in The Importance of Being Earnest through socialist-seeming satirization of the English upper class because the relationship between the English elite and the plebeians parallels that between the English as a whole and the Irish. 

Throughout _The Importance of Being Earnest_, Oscar Wilde mocks the English upper class, creating ostensible socialist themes. One particular instance of Wilde mocking the upper class occurs early in the drama when Algernon states, "if the lower orders don't set us a good example, what on earth is the use of them? They seem, as a class, to have absolutely no sense of moral responsibility" (2). Despite the fact that high society in this time period placed considerable emphasis on propriety (Holland 5), Algernon feels that the oppressed, struggling lower class should set the example for the aristocracy that generally prides itself on respectability. This ironic statement shows Wilde's belief in the superiority of the working class, as even his upper-class characters believe that they should look up to the "lower orders" as an example. This demonstrates the upper class's hypocrisy; the aristocrats claimed to stress morality, yet in reality they completely lacked it, as demonstrated by Algernon's and Jack's need to Bunbury. Algernon's ridiculous disgust with the lower class conversely leads the audience to feel comparable disgust for the upper class of which he is a member, demonstrating the hypocrisy and deception of the English upper class and as a result supporting the socialist belief that the working class should possess the power and wealth that it produces through strenuous toil. Another instance of Wilde ridiculing the rich occurs when Lady Bracknell insults Algernon for being an orphan, declaring, "To lose one parent ... may be regarded as a misfortune; to lose both looks like carelessness" (14). This shows the rich's complete callousness towards those with poor fortune, reflecting their apathy to those who lack economic fortune. By making the instance of insensitivity so extreme, Wilde bolsters the apparent socialist themes, intensifying the satire of the English rich. By portraying the aristocrats in this play as devoid of morality and sympathy, Wilde harshly criticizes them, forging strong socialist themes in the process.

Though the play contains a dichotomy between the country and the city, Wilde demonstrates no favoritism with his ridicule, demonstrating the he is mocking the English upper-class as a whole, not just dwellers of one realm. Every major character in the play possesses a foil from the other world. These sets of counterparts&mdash;Algernon and Jack, Cecily and Gwendolen, and Lady Bracknell and Miss Prism&mdash;mirror each other so well that one can easily forget who hails from which land. Algernon and Jack both Bunbury (6) and each bickers profusely with the other (2-8). They Bunbury so that they can shirk their responsibilities and engagements, representing the class as a whole shirking its responsibilities to support the destitute and the menial laborers necessary for their prosperity. The fact that both partake in this action shows the balance between the Londoners and the country-dwellers in the play. Wilde further creates socialist themes and equality between Londoners and country folk by having those from both London and the country say lines that mock the rich. In one such instance, Algernon, from the city, states, "It is awfully hard work doing nothing" (17). In a time when the poor toiled in factories all day, Algernon finds it hard work to deprive himself of the luxuries&mdash;theatres, clubs, and other forms of leisure&mdash;to which he has become accustomed. Jack, Algernon's foil, equally strongly shows a major flaw with the upper class, the lack of honesty and true propriety when he declares, "Gwendolen, it is a terrible thing for a man to find out suddenly that all his life has has been speaking nothing but the truth. Can you forgive me?" (54). This statement directly opposes what one would generally expect to hear, as he states his deep contrition for the horrible offense of telling the truth, when most, including those of the society of the time, theoretically, value honesty as a virtue rather than a crime. The fact that Wilde has his characters from both the city and the country say lines with scathing implications about the upper class shows that he directs the satire at the the upper class as a whole, rather than just those who live in the city or in the country, creating an apparent socialist theme by criticizing the rich. 

This apparent socialist theme means little on its own, as Wilde's beliefs did not perfectly fit into socialism, but it exposes a deep metaphor in the work. Killeen argues that did not solely claim socialism because he believed in its basic principles; instead, he argues, Wilde utilized the socialism for other purposes. In _The Soul of Man Under Socialism_, Killeen argues that Wilde mentioned popular socialist philosophers more as "name-dropping", as a way to augment the essay's popularity (110). Wilde believed in the main tenets of socialism, but his beliefs far transcended conventional socialism of the time (Hitchens 88). Instead of merely lobbying for socialism because he believed in it, Killeen argues that he employed his socialism as a tool, in this case for marketing. Rather than simply believing in socialism, an extremely radical concept at the time, Wilde's beliefs acted like a left-going Zax that would trek as far left as possible. Wilde directly stated this in an interview when he stated, "I am rather more than a Socialist ... I am something of an Anarchist" (Killeen 109). In the context of Wilde's anarchism, the criticism of the rich in the play gains new meaning. The fact that Wilde harshly criticizes the aristocratic characters of his plays represents a criticism of English government and society itself. By exposing the superficiality of their honor and honesty, Wilde undermines their Victorian values, portraying the apparent morality as a thin, ornate facade attempting to cover deep-rooted decay of the society. Hitchens states that Wilde, "taught us to ask, of their majesties, whether they deserve us, or our continued amiable subservience" (90), but Wilde surpasses that query here. In this play, his socialist themes ask whether the entire upper class deserves the submission of the working class that labors harder than the nobles only to see most of the riches it produces diverted back to the nobles for which they work. This persuades the audience not only to question the government but to question the entire socioeconomic system. This subversive act of simultaneously questioning the economic system and the government supports the socialist theme and more directly leads the audience to the theme that the socialist theme represents, the belief that England is oppressing Ireland just as the upper class is oppressing the lower class. 

Wilde, an avid Irish nationalist, used the socialist theme in the play to symbolize Irish nationalism. Wilde strongly supported Ireland and abhorred England. His mother, "an ardent Irish patriot" (Holland 8), wrote critical pieces targeting the English government (Killeen 135), so Wilde experienced extreme pro-Irish viewpoints from a young age. Wilde frequently criticized the English for misinterpreting him (Coakley 184) and even often "[used] the pages of the popular [English] press in order to condemn its values" (Guy 135). England did much to provoke this disdain. Just a few years before Wilde's birth, the Great Irish Famine occurred, and the English allowed 1 million Irish to starve to death while still Ireland still exported food (Killeen 134). Further, England ruled Ireland against the people's will. Finally, on a personal level, the English censored his plays on several occasions (Coakley 183). For these reasons and his natural bias because he was Irish, Wilde saw England as an oppressive, tyrannical ruler of Ireland. Thus, the blatant socialist support in the play also symbolizes support for Ireland's freedom from England's rule. The criticism of the aristocrats in the drama symbolically criticizes all of England, as the upper class possesses the power in England, allowing it to stand for England itself. Further, the pompous attitude of the characters in the play, demonstrated especially by the frequent verbal sparring sessions between Jack and Algernon, represents not only the grandiose Victorian attitude filled with false morality but England's attitude toward Ireland as well, as England, "considered [Ireland] to be the very antithesis of progress and evolution" (Killeen 133). The potato famine provides further parallel; the insensitivity of England towards the Irish people's plight directly corresponds to the rich's callousness toward the plight of the working class, toiling for long hours in dangerous conditions for little pay. The strong parallel between these two causes that Wilde supported allowed him to nestle support for one within the other. 

Though Wilde supported socialism as well, he primarily utilized the socialist-seeming theme in _The Importance of Being Earnest_ as a metaphor for the theme of Irish nationalism. This theme had more value to him because he was born rich but Irish. Morally, he opposed both England's subjugation of Ireland and the wealthy's subjugation of the working class, but he only stood to gain from Irish nationalism. In fact, as a fairly affluent figure, he probably would have personally suffered from a transition to socialism and a redistribution of wealth. Though socialism and mocking the upper class of England were not Wilde's primary intention, they acted as an extremely effective vehicle for conveying that theme because of the strong parallel. The socialist themes played a pivotal role in the play; though most at the time opposed socialism, simply supporting it did not lead to massive censorship and criminal proceedings. On the other hand, satirizing the English government and suggesting in a more straightforward manner that it does not deserve some of the sovereignty that it possesses would likely cause the government to censor the work and possibly hang him for treason. By concealing this surreptitious theme within another theme, Wilde managed to have his subversive play performed in London, the capital of the government that it harshly criticized. Had the play more directly expressed this theme, the effectiveness would have decreased due to the controversial and seditious nature of the message. 

This clandestine message demonstrates that an audience must be wary of interpreting any aspect of a literary work totally literally without considering the possibility of deeper meaning. Wilde showed that even other themes can aptly conceal a theme. Readers must take specially care when the writer worked during a time of censorship, but they must always use that diligent because censorship always exists. Even in America today, where technically one may state any opinion, that is not the case. The government may not repress a subversive or unpopular opinion like some others do, but the public still can. If a writer today were to desire to express her support for an opinion with which the vast majority disagrees, perhaps wanting pedophilia legalized, she would still need to use methods like this to protect her career and reputation while still imbuing her work with the theme. Since there will always be some highly-scorned opinions that the public or powerful people of the time find detestable, authors will find ingenious manners such as this one to cloak yet express their unpopular beliefs. 
